# Inaugural Speeches - Words and Emotions

## Introduction
Words have the power to make us feel happy, angry, curious, sad, loved, and a large list of other emotions. A right word in the right moment can change our lives or the course of history. In many ocassions, our emotions dictate our actions and shape our support or aversion towards certain things, people, sport teams, or policy positions. In April 2018, Michal Reifen-Tagar and Orly Idan, two researchers at the Interdisciplinary Centre Herzliya, in Israel, published the paper “A Rose by Any Other Name? A Subtle Linguistic Cue Impacts Anger and Corresponding Policy Support in Intractable Conflict”. In this study, by measuring the different levels of support and aversion to certain policies in the context of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the authors concluded that a good way to use language to reduce tension is to rely, whenever possible, on nouns rather than verbs. The authors found support for the hypothesis that phrasing conflict-relevant policies in noun form (vs. verb form) would reduce anger and impact policy support correspondingly.

## Research Question
Inspired by the work of these academics, the following project aims to find differences between the firsts and seconds inaugural speeches of U.S. Presidents. Are there any substantive differences between these two speeches? Do different term speeches have different emotional content?

## Data
To perform this research I am going to use the U.S. Inaugural Speeches database. The only major modification that was done to it was the removal of the third and fourth term speeches of Franklin D. Roosevelt, the only U.S. President who have served more than two terms.

## Conclusions and Ethics Discussion
The study of U.S. Presidents’ communication strategies has a gap on the comparisson between terms using Natural Language Methods. While some efforts have been done, the opportunities to continue exploring this topic under different frameworks are vast. In this project, I analyzed the differences between how Presidents addressed their audiences during firsts and seconds inaugural addresses. The analysis and disucssion was framed within a recent theory that states that diplomats and politicians can release tension and gain support for their policies just by using more verbs instead of nouns. This work provides support for the hypothesis of this scholars. According to the results presented, Presidents that were facing a crisis between its first and second terms have a higher noun/verb ratio that presidents who addressed the nation in calmer times. Furtheremore, the nouns that appeal to a crisis/challenge/threat were much more diverse during the second term speeches than the nouns associated to this topic in the first terms. It also seems that Presidents on their second term speech tried to tried to justify more their election towards the nation by presenting themselves as “saviors” rather than presenting themselves as leaders bringin new hope to citizens.

Regarding ethical considerations, it is important to mention that NLP techniques must be used carefully. Particularly, when studying large periods of time, researches must take into account the context in which different words and framings were used. When finding similar and disimilar speeches, a closer look should be made since actually different expressions and words might be more similar than what these processes might report. NLP methods cannot make this work for humans, at least for now. NLP catches up patterns and relations that reflect societal biases at different points in time. In this particular case, when a word was categorized as one that provoked negative or positive feelings, it was only based on a contemporary interpreation of the word and without the sensitivity that context and a deeper qualitative investigation can provide. Nevertheless, this NLP approach for the study of political communications in time can save resources when starting an investigation by providing initial clues on where starting to look.
